(1) In your own words, describe what this lab was about: Describe the various components that you implemented and
how they work. This part needs to demonstrate your understanding of the lab! If your description looks like a
copy paste of the instructions or a copy-paste of the provided documentation you will lose points.

This lab involved building a simple locking-based transaction system in SimpleDb. We were required to implement lock
and unlock operations in our code, as well as managing the locks held by each transaction and ensure that locks are
granted to transactions when necessary.


LockManager – Manages the locks on pages, ensuring transactions are safely and correctly access and modify data
without conflicts (this entire file, is almost like a helper file for our BufferPool)

    - lockStats() – Helps determine if a transaction can acquire the desired lock on a page.
      This method checks if the page already has a lock and whether the current permissions
      allow for the requested lock. If the page is not locked, the lock can be granted. If
      the page has a READ_ONLY lock, the method further checks if the requested permissions are also
      READ_ONLY or if the transaction already holds a lock on the page, ensuring only one transaction
      holds the lock at a time.

    - acquireLock() – Responsible for granting locks to transactions on specific pages while ensuring data
      consistency and preventing conflicts. This method checks if the requested lock can be granted using the
      lockStats() method. If the lock can not be granted right away, the transaction is put into a waiting state
      using wait() until it is notified that the lock is available. Once the lock can be acquired, the method
      initializes and updates data to track the locks held by each transaction and the transactions holding locks
      on each page. It updates the set of pages locked by the transaction, transactions holding locks on the page,
      and the permissions for the page. It uses notifyAll() once the lock has been granted, allowing other waiting
      transactions to continue.

    - releasePage() – Helps manage the release of locks held by transactions. This method checks if the transaction
      has locked the specific page by verifying the sets of locked pages and transactions. If the page is locked by
      the transaction, then the method will remove the page from the set of pages locked by the transactions, and if
      no pages remain, it removes the transaction entirely.  It also will remove the transaction from the set of
      transactions holding locks on the page and, if no transactions remain, removes the page and its associated
      permissions. It will also notifyAll() to let the other waiting transactions continue.

    - holdsLock() – Verifies whether a transaction holds a lock on a specific page. This method does this by verifying
      two conditions: if the page has a set of transactions holding locks AND if the specific transaction is part of
      that set, and if the transaction has a set of pages it has locked and if the specific page is among them.
      By confirming these conditions, the method determines if the transaction holds the lock on the page.

getPage() - This method ensures that the appropriate lock is acquired before a page is accessed, maintaining
the 2PL protocol. It attempts to acquire a lock on the specified page using lockManager.acquireLock().
If the lock can not be acquired right away, the transaction waits until the lock becomes available.
Once the lock is acquired, the method checks if the page is already in the buffer pool. If not, then it adds
the page to the buffer pool, handling evictions, and then returns the page.

heapfile.iterator() – provides an iterator to traverse through the pages in a HeapFile, ensuring that a READ_ONLY
lock is acquired on each page before accessing its tuples. The iterator initializes the page number and updates the
fields to acquire the page lock. It iterates through the pages, checking for the next available page and its tuples,
and releases the lock when done/closed. The purpose of this is to ensure the transaction adheres to the strict 2PL
protocol

insertTuple() – inserts a tuple into the database file, ensuring that the appropriate lock is acquired before
modifying the pages. It loops through the page in the file, attempting to acquire a READ_WRITE lock on each page.
If an empty slot is found, the tuple is inserted, and the page is marked dirty. If no empty slot is found, a new
page is created for the tuple, and the tuple is inserted. This helps maintain transaction consistency by acquiring
locks at the page level and ensures the transaction adheres to the strict 2PL protocol.

deleteTuple() – deletes a tuple from the database file, ensuring that the appropriate lock is acquired before
modifying the pages. It checks if the page containing the tuple exists within the valid page range and then
acquires a READ_WRITE lock on the page. The tuple is deleted, the page is marked dirty, and the modified page is
returned. This helps maintain transaction consistency by acquiring locks at the page level and ensuring the
transaction adheres to the strict 2PL protocol

evictPage() - manages the eviction of pages without evicting dirty pages, adhering to the NO STEAL policy.
This method loops through the buffer pool to identify a clean page suitable for eviction. If a clean page is found,
it is going to be evicted. If all pages in the buffer pool are dirty, the method throws a DbException indicating
there are no more clean pages available for eviction. Once a clean page is found the method flushes the page to disk.
It then removes the page from the buffer pool to make space for new pages. This makes sure that the maintenance of
the transaction is consistent.

Aside from lock management via the LockManager, this lab was also about detecting and navigating deadlocks. Deadlocks
can be detected by keeping a graph that tracks which transactions are waiting on which before they can acquire their lock
or via timing out once we wait for some x time and decide that something is probably deadlocked. We chose to do a cycle
detection using DFS. isDeadlock() is the wrapper function which calls isCyclic() to detect cycles. It would return
true all the way up if a deadlock is found which we will then deal with.
Once we detect a deadlock, we can either abort ourselves or abort everything else to let ourselves get all the locks
we need. We chose to abort ourselves so that meant releasing all the locks that we're currently holding on to and
removing ourselves from the graph so that everyone else can continue on.

Regardless if a transaction aborts or commits, we need to finish and clean things up. In transactionComplete(), when
the transaction successfully commits, we flush all the pages that were touched by the transaction into disk, then
we release all the locks related to this transaction. For abort, we find the pages that were modified by this transaction
and replaced them with the on-disk state since the transaction failed to commit and we need to rollback. We also
relase all the locks related to this transaction on abort since its been aborted, we need to clean up.

(2) Describe a unit test that could be added to improve the set of unit tests that we provided for this lab.
- An additional test that can improve the set of unit tests provided is another in LockingTest.java
where rather than acquiring then releasing, then acquiring again for the same page (like in acquireThenRelease)
we first acquire locks for multiple pages say like `bp.getPage(tid1, p0, Permissions.READ_WRITE);` and
`bp.getPage(tid2, p2, Permissions.READ_WRITE);` and `bp.getPage(tid3, p3, Permissions.READ_WRITE);` without unlocking
them. Then we unlock p2 and check that we cant get locks for p1 and p3, but we can get a lock for p2. This
tests that upon unlocking, we not only unlock the right page but we also arent unlocking everything by mistake.

(3) Describe any design decisions you made, including your deadlock detection policy, locking granularity, etc.
Lock Management
    - One of the key designs we made was to implement LockManager in a separate file rather than integrating it
      directly within BufferPool.java. The reason behind this was purely for readability. To keep the locking
      logic separate from the buffer pool logic so it would be easier for both of us to easily understand and
      modify the locking mechanisms without going through the entire bufferpool code.

    - In LockManager, we used HashMap and HashSet structures to track locks held by transactions and the transactions
      holding locks on pages. The reason behind this is because it helps provide access and manipulation of
      lock information.

- We used synchronized methods in the LockManager to ensure thread safety. Synchronization can help with managing locks.

- We used wait() and notifyAll() to manage lock acquisition and release. Wait() allows a transaction to wait until the
desired lock becomes available, while notifyAll() allows all the waiting threads to continue once the lock is released.

- For deadlock detection we decided to do a cycle detection. It was mentioned in lecture that a time-out policy
would've taken a lot of fine-tuning. We weren't sure how long that process would take so we thought it'd be easier if
we just implemented a cycle detection since we've learned before that we can detect cycles using DFS which is
what we implemented.

- For deadlock resolution we decided on aborting ourselves. Aborting everyone else seems a bit volatile, and we just
thought aborting ourselves would be more straightforward.


(4) Discuss and justify any changes you made to the API.
N/A

(5) If you have any feedback for us on the assignment, you can add it to the writeup, send us an email,
or make a note and paste your note in the course evaluation form at the end of the quarter.
N/A

